Rich Hickey eschewed CLOS as the basis of Clojure's object system for the following reasons:
1) Rejection of mutable state - CLOS' objects are inherently mutable. Clojure's data structures (lists, maps, sets, and vectors) are inherently immutable. Adding mutable objects to the mix would have compromized Clojure's immutability guarantees.
2) The "Blob" ptroblem - Hickey saw traditional objects as "Blobs" that conflate and tightly couple data and behavior inside the class system. This makes it difficult to share data across different parts of a system without dragging along a heavy hierarchy.
3) The complexity trap - CLOS provides multiple inheritance and allows one to construct complex class hierarchies. Hickey saw this as an inherent complexity trap.
4) JVM limitations - As Clojure was constructed to run on the JVM, Hickey believed that building CLOS, with dynamic dispatch, multiple inheritance, and a MOP could not be done efficiently.

FOL (Functional Object Lisp) was designed and implemented because we believed that giving up the power of CLOS and its MOP was too high a price to pay. To test this idea, we built a version of Lisp having immutable objects. These objects use assoc/dissoc operations to bind/unbind object slot values, returning an altered object. Immutability is enforced by the CLOS MOP.

Our philosophy can be summed up as "What is an object, but a mapping from slot-names to slot-values?". And even though defclass tags the map with an object type, this does not mean that the user must arrange these classes in deeply nested or complexly linked clusters (in fact, our studies have found that seldom do classes have more than a single parent). Also, seldom do method hierarchies use much inheritance. When a method is defined, it almost always has a different implementation from its predecessors; conversely, when a method uses call-next-method, or a :before, :around, or :after specifier, it's for an operation that cannot be wxpressed any other way.

We view CLOS and its MOP as a power boost rather than an inherent source of complexity. In practice, multiple inheritance and complex class hierarchies are rarely used. Complex method combinations are not used unless necessary.

We transpile FOL into Common Lisp. As such, there is no impedence mismatch between FOL's CLOS and MOP and the object model of the target machine.

From Clojure, we take its syntax, immutability, and core data structures (lists, maps, sets, and vectors). These core data structures are implemented as 32-way HAMTs, tries, and B-Trees. In additon, Clojure's main storage primitives - Atoms, Refs (with STM), and Agents - are present. Metadata is supported. Seq-based functions are supported, as are tranducers - lazy evaluation is implemented. Macros use Clojure's syntax and auto-gensym is available. In-line functions are supported. Several libraries (such as core.async, walk, string, and reducers) are present. We went through the Clojure Cheat Sheet and implemented most of the functions therein.

We also kept many features of Common Lisp. The numeric tower is made of unwrapped Common Lisp primitives. Instead of Clojure's namespaces, we used Common Lisp's packages. We retained Common Lisp's conditions and error handling. We kept Common Lisp's streams. We implemented our Thread objects with bordeaux-threads. And, of course defclass, defgeneric, and defmethod are there (with a slightly Clojurized syntax), as are MOP functions.

We added a few bells and whistles found in neither Clojure or Common Lisp - all items, including primitives, have classes. There are new functions like Clojure's pmap: pfilter, pmapcat, etc. One can define generic functions taking multiple argument list patterns. Functions and methods, rather than being limited to dispatch on type and EQL values, can also be dispatched on arbitrary functions (this is described in our paper to be delivered at the 2026 European Lisp Symposium). In FOL, types are of the form <type-name> and type predicates are of the form <type-name>?. These are used to distinguish type predicates from the arbitrary predicates used for dispatch. Doing this allows us to order the checks in the transpiled functions in a manner that is deterministic, decidable, and relatively performant (again, this is described in the ELS 2026 paper). Multi-dimensional arrays are supported, but we will be defining functions ala APL/J/K to manipulate these.

These features have allowed us to find coding patterns which can be used to define functions that are not easily implemented in either Clojure or Common Lisp.

The implementation comes with an early interpreted version of the language, the transpiler, full documentation, ~3000 test cases comprising ~4500 checks, and a set of benchmarks. There is also a VSCode plugin for FOL implementing syntax checking and a REPL evaluator. It is licensed under the MIT license.

FOL can be found at https://www.github.com/frankadrian314159/fol. PRs and issue reports are welcome, as are monetary contributions. Assistance with testing and implementation are needed - especially checking the transpiler on Common Lisp implementations other than SBCL and on platforms other than Windows.

Note that we were assisted in writing FOL by Google Gemini (Pro and Flash) and Anthropic's Claude Sonnet 4.6. We described the architecture and checked the code. The LLMs did most of the coding. We estimated that using the LLMs decreased development time by a factor of 10.
Thanks for your attention.